feat(source-integrity): extend sourceIntegrity for traditional helm repos (#27741)
argoproj/argo-cd: docs/user-guide/source-integrity-helm-provenance.md

# Helm chart provenance verification

## Overview

Source integrity Helm policies verify Helm chart signatures for **traditional Helm repositories** — HTTP/HTTPS chart repos (`repoURL` + `chart`). This is [Helm chart provenance](https://helm.sh/docs/topics/provenance/) verification.

This verification is equivalent to running:

```bash
helm pull <repo>/mychart --version 1.0.0 --prov
gpg --verify mychart-1.0.0.tgz.prov
```

Argo CD automatically performs these steps during sync:

1. Fetches the chart and its `.prov` signature file from the Helm repository
2. Verifies the PGP signature using keys configured in `provenance.keys`
3. Ensures the chart contents match the cryptographically signed digest

For implementation details (mirror fallback, digest checks, sync errors), see [What Argo CD verifies](#what-argo-cd-verifies) below.

> [!NOTE]
> **OCI Helm charts**
>

> > OCI Helm registries (`enableOCI: true` or host-style `repoURL` without `https://`) are **not** covered by `sourceIntegrity.helm` in this release. Chart integrity for OCI Helm is planned as part of broader OCI support (for example Sigstore/cosign), not Helm `.prov` layers on OCI artifacts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> OCI Helm registries (`enableOCI: true` or host-style `repoURL` without `https://`) and Helm `.prov` layers on OCI artifacts are **not** verified by `sourceIntegrity.helm` in the moment.
```

@aali309, please double-check if I understood things correctly here.

Author: Yes @olivergondza, applied the suggested changes. Thanks

For GnuPG verification of Git commit signatures, see [Git GnuPG verification](./source-integrity-git-gpg.md).

> [!NOTE]
> **Compatibility**
>
> Helm provenance policies are configured under `AppProject.spec.sourceIntegrity.helm`.

> > At least one of `git` or `helm` must be set on `sourceIntegrity` (they are both optional fields, but the object cannot be empty).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> [!WARNING]
> **Policies silently bypass if GnuPG is disabled**
>

> > Provenance verification requires `ARGOCD_GPG_ENABLED=true` on `argocd-repo-server`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Provenance verification requires `ARGOCD_GPG_ENABLED=true` environment variable set.
```

Let's again not suggest to make this heterogenous in the cluster. IIRC, this is needed by the application controller as well.

>
> **Critical:** If GnuPG is disabled, configured policies will **pass without verification** —
> there is no error or warning. Unsigned charts or charts with invalid signatures will
> deploy successfully.
>
> Verify GnuPG is enabled before relying on provenance policies:

> >

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!WARNING]
> **Policies silently bypass if GnuPG is disabled**
>
> Provenance verification requires `ARGOCD_GPG_ENABLED=true` Environment Variable.
>
> **Critical:** If GnuPG is disabled, configured policies will **pass without verification** —
> there is no error or warning. Unsigned charts or charts with invalid signatures will
> deploy successfully.
>
> Verify GnuPG is enabled before relying on provenance policies:
>
```

### Keyring management

Import the chart maintainer's public key (the key that signs `.prov` files when you run `helm package --sign`):

```bash
argocd gpg add --from <path-to-key>
argocd gpg list
```

Then reference that key ID in your Helm provenance policy (`provenance.keys`).

> [!NOTE]
> After you import a key, it may take a short time to propagate to all `argocd-repo-server` pods.
> If sync fails right after import, wait briefly and retry, or restart the repo-server pods.

For Web UI import, declarative setup via `argocd-gpg-keys-cm`, and full keyring workflows, see [Keyring management](./source-integrity-git-gpg.md#keyring-management) in the Git GnuPG guide.

### Inspecting the keyring

Helm provenance uses the same keyring as Git. For background and sync behavior, see [Inspecting GnuPG key ring](./source-integrity-git-gpg.md#inspecting-gnupg-key-ring) in the Git GnuPG guide.

Quick check that a key ID from `provenance.keys` is on the repo-server:

```bash
kubectl exec -it <argocd-repo-server-pod> -- \
  sh -c 'GNUPGHOME=/app/config/gpg/keys gpg --list-keys'
```

## What Argo CD verifies

> Once `.prov` bytes and chart `.tgz` bytes are loaded, Argo CD runs these steps (check name `HELM/PROVENANCE`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once `.prov` and chart archive are loaded, Argo CD runs these steps (check name `HELM/PROVENANCE`):
```

| Step | What is checked |
|------|-----------------|
| 1. Provenance present | `.prov` content is non-empty |
| 2. PGP signature | `gpg --verify` on the cleartext message; signer key ID must be in `provenance.keys` and in the repo-server keyring |
| 3. Signed body parse | Extract the signed YAML plaintext from the PGP cleartext envelope |

> | 4. Files digest | Find `files.<chart-filename>: sha256:...` in the signed body and compare to SHA256 of the chart `.tgz` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| 4. Files digest | Find `files.<chart-filename>: sha256:...` in the signed body and compare to SHA256 of the chart archive |
```

Only one Helm policy applies per source repository. Sources not matched by any policy are not verified for provenance.

Multi-source applications can combine Git and traditional Helm policies in the same `sourceIntegrity` block:

```yaml
spec:
  sourceIntegrity:
    git:
      policies:
        - repos:
            - url: "https://github.com/my-org/*"
          gpg:
            mode: head
            keys:
              - "D56C4FCA57A46444"
    helm:
      policies:
        - repos:
            - url: "https://charts.example.com/*"
          provenance:
            keys:
              - "4AEE18F83AFDEB23"
```

### The `provenance` policy

| Field | Meaning |
|-------|---------|
| `keys` | Allowed signer key IDs (short or long form). Keys must be present in the repo-server GnuPG keyring. |

When a matching policy includes `provenance`, Argo CD requires verification to succeed before sync: `.prov` must be present, the signature must verify, the signer must be listed in `keys`, and the chart digest must match.

> When `keys` is empty, verification still runs but no signer is trusted. Sync fails if `.prov` is missing, or with `signed with unallowed key` if the chart is signed. Configure at least one trusted key ID to allow sync.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sync fails if `.prov` is missing, or with `signed with unallowed key` if the chart is signed, but the signature key is not present in `.provenance.keys`.
```

# Helm chart provenance verification

## Overview

Source integrity Helm policies verify Helm provenance for **traditional Helm repositories** — HTTP/HTTPS chart repos (`repoURL` + `chart`).

Argo CD:

1. Fetches chart bytes and `.prov` bytes from the Helm repo index and mirrors
2. Verifies the PGP signature with keys from `provenance.keys`

> 3. Checks the chart SHA256 digest matches the signed provenance

Reviewer: Are these three things something that users of signed helm charts are expected to be knowledgeable about? That is an honest question - I have no idea, so I would find it hard to tell if this is the document I am looking for.

In case this is indeed too technical / low-level, it might be better to reword the overview to something like: *This verifies charts sign through method ABC, its verification is analogous to calling `DEF` command.*

Author: Ah, I see what you mean here. I think most users are familiar with Helm provenance signing (helm package --sign) and local verification (helm pull --prov + gpg --verify). I’ll reword the overview

### Keyring management

Import the chart maintainer's public key (the key that signs `.prov` files when you run `helm package --sign`):

```bash
argocd gpg add --from <path-to-key>
argocd gpg list
```

Then reference that key ID in your Helm provenance policy (`provenance.keys`).

> [!NOTE]
> After you import a key, it may take a short time to propagate to all `argocd-repo-server` pods.
> If sync fails right after import, wait briefly and retry, or restart the repo-server pods.

For Web UI import, declarative setup via `argocd-gpg-keys-cm`, and full keyring workflows, see [Keyring management](./source-integrity-git-gpg.md#keyring-management) in the Git GnuPG guide.

### Inspecting the keyring

Helm provenance uses the same keyring as Git. For background and sync behavior, see [Inspecting GnuPG key ring](./source-integrity-git-gpg.md#inspecting-gnupg-key-ring) in the Git GnuPG guide.

Quick check that a key ID from `provenance.keys` is on the repo-server:

```bash
kubectl exec -it <argocd-repo-server-pod> -- \
  sh -c 'GNUPGHOME=/app/config/gpg/keys gpg --list-keys'
```

> ## Helm provenance file structure

Reviewer: Too implementation specific, maybe? Unless users need to know this I would remove...

Hash: SHA512

apiVersion: v2
name: mychart
version: 1.0.0
...

files:
  mychart-1.0.0.tgz: sha256:<64-hex-char-digest>
-----BEGIN PGP SIGNATURE-----
...
-----END PGP SIGNATURE-----
```

| Part | Role |
|------|------|
| Signed plaintext | YAML metadata plus a `files:` section naming the chart archive and its `sha256` digest |
| PGP signature | Proves the plaintext was signed by the maintainer's private key |

The chart archive itself (`.tgz` bytes) is verified separately against the digest in that `files:` entry.

## What Argo CD verifies

Once `.prov` bytes and chart `.tgz` bytes are loaded, Argo CD runs these steps (check name `HELM/PROVENANCE`):

| Step | What is checked |
|------|-----------------|
| 1. Provenance present | `.prov` content is non-empty |
| 2. PGP signature | `gpg --verify` on the cleartext message; signer key ID must be in `provenance.keys` and in the repo-server keyring |
| 3. Signed body parse | Extract the signed YAML plaintext from the PGP cleartext envelope |
| 4. Files digest | Find `files.<chart-filename>: sha256:...` in the signed body and compare to SHA256 of the chart `.tgz` |

If any step fails, sync is blocked with a `ResourceComparison` error.

> ## How provenance is loaded

Reviewer: Too implementation specific, maybe? Unless users need to know this I would remove...

To skip Helm provenance checks for a project, do not configure `sourceIntegrity.helm` (or use a project without `sourceIntegrity`). Each Helm policy requires a `provenance` block in the CRD.

## Sync failures and check results

Failed verification surfaces as `ApplicationConditionComparisonError` with details under `sourceIntegrityResult` (check name `HELM/PROVENANCE`).

## Testing your setup

### Verify a chart locally

Before adding a project policy, confirm the maintainer key and `.prov` file are valid:

```bash
helm pull <repo>/mychart --version 1.0.0 --prov
gpg --verify mychart-1.0.0.tgz.prov
```

Import the signer key into Argo CD and confirm it is listed:

```bash
argocd gpg add --from <path-to-key>
argocd gpg list
```

### Test with a project policy

Create a test `AppProject` and application that point at a signed chart whose key is in `provenance.keys`, then sync and confirm `Application.status` has no comparison errors and `sourceIntegrityResult` shows a passing `HELM/PROVENANCE` check.

## Troubleshooting

### Disabling verification

> Set `ARGOCD_GPG_ENABLED=false` on repo-server (and related pods) to disable GnuPG globally, including Helm provenance. See [Git GnuPG troubleshooting](./source-integrity-git-gpg.md#disabling-the-feature).

Reviewer: I would not encourage heterogenous setting of `ARGOCD_GPG_ENABLED` in the cluster. It is not tested thoroughly, and the risks of leaving it this way after troubleshooting are too high.

Ref.: https://github.com/argoproj/argo-cd/issues/27994

            keys:
              - "4AEE18F83AFDEB23"
```

The `repos` field lists glob patterns matched against the application's Helm `repoURL` (same rules as Git policies: positive globs apply, negative globs starting with `!` exclude).

Only one Helm policy applies per source repository. Sources not matched by any policy are not verified for provenance.

Multi-source applications can use different Helm policies per Helm source, and may combine Git and Helm policies in the same `sourceIntegrity` block:

```yaml
spec:
  sourceIntegrity:
    git:
      policies:
        - repos:
            - url: "https://github.com/my-org/*"
          gpg:
            mode: head
            keys:
              - "D56C4FCA57A46444"
    helm:
      policies:
        - repos:
            - url: "https://charts.example.com/*"
          provenance:
            keys:
              - "4AEE18F83AFDEB23"
```

### The `provenance` policy

| Field | Meaning |
|-------|---------|
| `keys` | Allowed signer key IDs (short or long form). Keys must be present in the repo-server GnuPG keyring. |

When `keys` is non-empty for a matching policy, Argo CD requires provenance verification to succeed before sync.

> When `keys` is empty, provenance verification is not performed for repositories matched by that policy (useful when you want the policy slot but no cryptographic check yet).

Reviewer: IIRC this is different semantics from git+gpg where it implies _it trusts nothing_. Treating the same named key differently can be confusing. What is the value you see for claiming the "policy slot"?

Author: So originally, `provenance.mode: none | provenance was used (similar to Git gpg.mode)`, but we dropped mode field and empty keys became the implicit equivalent of `mode: none` (i.e skip verification). Thinking of it, I agree we should mirror GIT for consistency and reduce confusion. So when key is empty should fail with signed with unknown key or failed to fetch `.prov` file depending on if the chart was signed or not.

#### `signed with unallowed key`

Cause: Signature is valid but the signer key ID is not listed in `provenance.keys`.

Diagnosis:

```bash
gpg --verify chart.tgz.prov
# Note the key ID in "Good signature from ..."
```

Fix: `argocd gpg add --from <path-to-key>` and add that key ID to `provenance.keys`.

#### `chart digest mismatch`

Cause: SHA256 of the chart `.tgz` does not match the digest in the signed `.prov` body.

Possible causes: chart changed after signing, wrong version fetched, or local/cache corruption.

Fix: `argocd app sync <app> --force` to refresh the cached chart; if the error persists, contact the chart maintainer.

#### `could not access chart for provenance verification`

Cause: Argo CD could not read the chart `.tgz` or fetch `.prov` (cache, network, or index/OCI layout).

Fix: Check repo-server logs, repository credentials, and that `helm pull` / OCI pull works outside Argo CD for the same chart version.

#### `multiple (N) Helm source integrity policies found for repo URL`

Cause: More than one `sourceIntegrity.helm` policy matches the application's `repoURL`.

Fix: Narrow `repos` globs so exactly one policy matches.

> ## Upgrade and API changes

Reviewer: Since Helm support for Source Integrity is new, I do not think there are backwards compatibility concerns here.

Consider dropping this last section. It seems to repeat what is already stated earlier, and adds a lot of details that can get outdated with future source integrity expansion.
